When you create a file its group
is set to your primary group, so
if you're a member of multiple groups,
for example, a sales and
training group,
if sales is your primary or
first group then when you create a new
file it will be in the sales group.
If you wanna change the group of the file,
use the chgrp command.
You can see that when I created
the sales.data file that it was put in my
primary group, which is Jason.
I'm also a member of the sales group.
So let's change the group to sales for
this file.
Now we can see that the group is sales,
and let's give permissions so
that other people in the sales
group can edit the file.
There we go.
So, instead of keeping files in different
people's home directories maybe you could
have a common place to store these.
So in this system there's
a usr/local/sales directory.
And you can see that the sales
group has read, write, and
execute permissions for that.
So, I'm gonna put the shared
file in that shared location.
Now, anyone that is a member of
the sales group can edit that file.
Let's look at directory permissions again.
Permissions on a directory can
affect the files in that directory.
A common problem is having proper
permission set on a file within
a directory only to have the incorrect
permission set on the directory itself.
Not having the correct permissions on
a directory can prevent the execution of
the file for example.
If you are sure that a file's permission
is correct, start looking at the directory
it's in, and then look at that
directory's parent directory, and
work your way all the way towards
the root of the file system.
The permissions are set to
755 on this directory, and
if I look in the directory I see one file.
And that is an executable file,
and it currently works.
So, let's change the directory
permissions on my cat to 400.
And now I only have read permission.
I don't have write or
execute permission on that directory.
You can see that the only information
I get from ls is the file name that is
in that directory because
of the read permission.
Since the permissions are set
improperly on the directory,
I can't even execute the file
that's in that directory.
Let's change the permissions
to give me execute permissions
on that directory, and
now we see that it works.
And you can also see that ls -l works.
The file creation mask is what determines
the permissions a file will receive when
it's created.
If no mask were used, then the default
permissions would be 777 for
directories and 666 for files.
The file creation mask is typically set
by system administrators
to some sane default.
However it can be overridden on a per
user basis by using the umask command.
The umask command sets the file creation
mask to the mode that you pass to it.
If you use a -S that means umask will
display and accept symbolic notation.
The mode supplied to umask works in the
opposite way as the mode given to chmod.
So when you give chmod seven, that's
interpreted to mean read, write, and
execute permission or all permissions.
However, when you supply seven to umask,
that is interpreted to mean no
permission or all permissions off.
So you can think of chmod as turning on,
or adding and
giving permissions while umask turns off,
subtracts, or takes away permissions.
A quick way to estimate what
a umask mode will do to the default
permissions is to subtract
the octal umask mode from 777 in
the case of directories and
from 666 in the case of files.
For example, let's take a umask of 022.
If we subtract that from 777,
we are left with the default file
creation mode of 755 for directories.
And 666 minus 022 is 644, so
for files,
the default file creation mode is 644.
If we use the umask of 002 then we'll
have the default permissions for
directories of 775 and 664 for files.
Using a umask of 002 is ideal for
working with members of your group since
the permissions allow members of the group
to manipulate those files in
directories that you create.
Again this method of subtracting
these permissions is an estimation.
So, here's an example of using a umask
where this breaks down a little bit.
So umask 007,
if you subtract that from 777,
you're left with 770 for
directory permissions which is fine.
However 666 minus 007 would
leave you with 66 negative 1.
So, there is no negative one permission,
there's just no permission.
So it breaks down a little bit, but it
gives you a good idea of what to expect.
Here are some fairly common umask modes,
022, 002, 077, and 007.
This table contains all the resulting
permissions created by each and
every one of the eight umask permutations.
If you were to run umask without any
arguments it will display the umask
in four characters instead of the three
that we've been working with.
The three characters we've been working
with represent user, group and other.
However, there is one other class, and
this class is considered special modes.
And these special modes are setuid,
setgid, and sticky.
Just know that these special modes
are declared by prepending a character
to the octal mode that you
normally use with umass or chmod.
So the important point here is to know
that umask 0022 is exactly the same as
umask 022, or
chmod 0644 is the same as chmod 644.
We're not gonna cover these
special modes in this course, but
I wanted you to be aware that one,
they exist, and two,
they're the reason why umask is displayed
in four characters instead of three.
You can see that our umask is set to 0022.
Using a capital S we
can get symbolic mode.
Let's see what the default
permissions are.
The touch command either creates
a file if it doesn't exist or
it updates the time stamp of a file.
So we see the directory was created
with 755 permissions and the file 644.
Let's set umask to 007.
Whoops.
And umask of 0007 is the same as 007.
And in this case we can see that
directories are created with 770
permissions, and
files are created with 660 permissions.
Permissions can be represented
by symbols or numbers.
The effect permissions have on
directories is slightly different
than they have on files.
We talked about how to change
permissions with a chdrp command.
We talked about some strategies of
working with members of your group.
And finally we covered the file
creation mask and the umask command.